0.10.5 - release notes (#2953)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2021-08-12-tungsten.md

---
author: Vadim Chelyshov
title: Metals v0.10.5 - Tungsten
authorURL: https://twitter.com/_dos65
authorImageURL: https://github.com/dos65.png
---

We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.10.5, which contains a lot of fixes, adds Scala 3.0.1 support,

> and even brings one nice feature!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and brings another nice feature!
```

<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">150</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">71</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center">18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">1</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/40?closed=1

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs,
Sublime Text and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Add support for `textDocument/selectionRange`
- [Scala 3] `Inferred Type` code action and other improvements
- Formatter - `runner.dialect` support and `.scalafmt.conf` update suggestions
- Dependency sources - search symbol references in the workspace

## Add support for `textDocument/selectionRange`

> Due to the great work by [@ckipp01](https://github.com/ckipp01)  now Metals implements `textDocument/selectionRange` LSP-method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the great work by [@ckipp01](https://github.com/ckipp01) Metals now implements the `textDocument/selectionRange` [LSP-method](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/specification-current/#textDocument_selectionRange).
```

> It allows you to easily select an expression and expand it using a single shortcut combination.

Reviewer: Do you think we should put the default VS Code shortcut in here since that's how many will use it?

Author: Added VSCode shortcuts and there is a lot of unused space left. Do you want to add VIM shortcuts?
![Screenshot from 2021-07-12 23-41-16](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5816952/125353022-b1906180-e36a-11eb-9481-027c7e3f1462.png)

Reviewer: > Do you want to add VIM shortcuts?

Probably not. The built-in LSP of Neovim doesn't support this yet. coc-metals does, but there isn't actual a default binding. So the user has to set it themselves.

> ![gif1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13974112/121028775-605be380-c7a8-11eb-99f1-948ce0b730ab.gif)

Reviewer: I don't feel strongly about this, but it's a bummer that VS Code inserts an extra range in there that Metals doesn't give it. It's super obvious. What do you think of using a different example that doesn't add in the extra range?

![2021-07-12 20 10 54](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13974112/125335989-7a5f8780-e34d-11eb-911f-42f851478737.gif)

You can use this one if you want.

Author: Replaced by suggested gif.
Honestly, it's hard to spot this issue :smile:

Reviewer: Haha I think I'm just paranoid about it and am afraid people will immediately notice it and be like "THIS DOESN'T WORK RIGHT!" 😆

## [Scala3] `Inferred Type` code action and other improvements

> We keep working on implementing the same feature set  for Scala 3 as Scala 2 has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're hard at work ensuring that the same feature-set for Scala 2 is available for Scala 3.
```

This release adds Inferred Type code action support.

![gif2](https://i.imgur.com/GJGFOOy.gif)

> In addition, ignoring other small fixes, it worth mentioning that `Go to Definition also was improved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to other small fixes, it's worth mentioning that the `Go to Definition` functionality was improved so that in situations where there are compilation issues, you're now able to better navigate to the definition site.
```

Then I'd just drop the following sentence.

Previously, it worked improperly in case if there were compile errors. 

## Formatter - `runner.dialect` support and `.scalafmt.conf` update suggestions.

> In order to support different Scala dialects scalafmt added [`runner.dialect` setting](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/docs/configuration.html#scala-3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to support different Scala dialects scalafmt added a [`runner.dialect` setting](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/docs/configuration.html#scala-3) to support Scala 3.
```

_Different Scala dialects_ is a familiar phrase for those of us that use Scalameta, but to an outsider this may not be clear what is meant. I'd explicitly state that this is to support Scala 3.

Now Metals knows about it and can correctly generate and even automatically upgrade `.scalafmt.conf`

## Dependency sources - search symbol references in the workspace

> Thanks to [@Z1kkurat](https://github.com/Z1kkurat) now reference search result from dependency source file includes workspaces sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to [@Z1kkurat](https://github.com/Z1kkurat) "Find References" now also works from within your dependency sources to include references from all workspace sources.
```

---
author: Vadim Chelyshov
title: Metals v0.10.5 - Tungsten
authorURL: https://twitter.com/_dos65
authorImageURL: https://github.com/dos65.png
---

> We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.10.5, which contains a lot of fixes, adds Scala 3.0.1 support,

Reviewer 2: Could you run prettifier on the file? It should wrap the paragraphs nicely.

and brings another nice feature!

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">150</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">71</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center">18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">1</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/40?closed=1

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs,
Sublime Text and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Add support for `textDocument/selectionRange`
- [Scala 3] `Inferred Type` code action and other improvements

> - Formatter - `runner.dialect` support and `.scalafmt.conf` update suggestions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Better support of scalafmt for Scala 3 projects
```

> - Dependency sources - search symbol references in the workspace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Search symbol references from dependency source in the workspace
```

## Add support for `textDocument/selectionRange`

Due to the great work by [@ckipp01](https://github.com/ckipp01) Metals now implements the `textDocument/selectionRange` [LSP-method](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/specification-current/#textDocument_selectionRange).
It allows you to easily select an expression and expand/shrink it using shortcut combinations:

![gif1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13974112/125335989-7a5f8780-e34d-11eb-911f-42f851478737.gif)

Default keybindings in VSCode:
<table>
  <tbody style={{"font-size": "13px"}}>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Win/Linux</td>
    <td>macOS</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Expand</td>
    <td>Shift+Alt+Right</td>
    <td>⌃⇧⌘→</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shrink</td>
    <td>Shift+Alt+Left</td>
    <td>⌃⇧⌘←</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## [Scala3] `Inferred Type` code action and other improvements

We're hard at work ensuring that the same feature-set for Scala 2 is available for Scala 3.
This release adds Inferred Type code action support.

![gif2](https://i.imgur.com/GJGFOOy.gif)

> In addition to other small fixes, it's worth mentioning that the `Go to Definition` functionality was improved so that in situations where there are compilation issues, you're now able to better navigate to the definition site.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to other small fixes, it's worth mentioning that the `Go to Definition` functionality was improved so that in situations, where there are compilation issues, you're now able to better navigate to the definition site.
```

Author: I think in English it isn't valid place for putting comma but I might be wrong.

Reviewer 2: Hmm... might that I am forcing the polish language versions here. Either way, you can ignore it.

Reviewer: Yea, I wouldn't put a `,` there.

Previously, it worked improperly in case if there were compile errors. 

## Formatter - `runner.dialect` support and `.scalafmt.conf` update suggestions.

In order to support different Scala dialects scalafmt added a [`runner.dialect` setting](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/docs/configuration.html#scala-3) to support Scala 3.

> Now Metals knows about it and can correctly generate and even automatically upgrade `.scalafmt.conf`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metals will now correctly generate and even automatically upgrade `.scalafmt.conf`
```

Reviewer 2: I would also add info:
`Moreover, in projects that contain different Scala major versions Metals will set a separate dialect for each separate source directory`

## Dependency sources - search symbol references in the workspace

Thanks to [@Z1kkurat](https://github.com/Z1kkurat) "Find References" now also works from within your dependency sources to include references from all workspace sources.

> Previously, it included only local occurrences in the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, it included only local occurrences in the dependency source file.
```

![gif3](https://i.imgur.com/myHPDjP.gif)

> ## Contributors

Reviewer 2: I would also add miscellaneous section and mention anything user facing (but not worth a separate section) from the PR list.

Big thanks to everybody who contributed to this release or reported an issue!

```
$ git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.10.4..v0.10.5
22	Scala Steward

> 22	ckipp01

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
22	Chris Kipp
```

18	Vadim Chelyshov
17	Tomasz Godzik
 2	Adrien Piquerez
 2	Luigi Frunzio

>  2	dependabot[bot]

Reviewer 2: Let's remove dependabot and Scala Steward, they're fun, but still just robots :D
